for furn 'old asylum can be seen in two
ways in one sense it protects those
inside the asylum from those outside as
in political asylum but in another sense
and the dominant one infernals day the
asylum will keep society free from
defects by putting defective people away
from society if you drive by the
Pinelands Center in New Gloucester today
it's hard to imagine that it too once
looked a lot like the film clip you just
saw institutions for the mentally
disabled were notorious for their
deplorable conditions overcrowding and
inadequate sanitation our next guest
became familiar with the fern old
institution in Waltham Massachusetts
because his Uncle Joe was a patient
there today Bill Rogers is a documentary
filmmaker whose latest film will be
shown next week at the Maine
International Film Festival in
Waterville he was kind enough to stop by
tonight to talk with us about his entry
it's a film called front wards backwards
what is it about this film that's so
compelling because 30 were screened and
this is one of eleven that was chosen to
be shown yeah I think the title front
Wars backwards refers to that the
institution had the front wards which
were for mainly the brighter residents
who really took sort of took care of
themselves and in some ways they took
care of the institution and in the back
wards are for the severely disabled
people the ones who really have a very
hard time managing basic things so they
were left to their to the those back
wards and largely shunned away and
pushed away from society and so it's
that what I was really interested in is
that sort of double-layer of both those
very capable as well as those who were
extremely disabled and how did they all
get contained by the same place what do
you think it is that struck a nerve with
people that we want to see this because
it's a hard subject yeah well you know
my access came from my uncle who was
there and I think the fact that there
were millions of people who were in
institutions like that brings up the
question Wow
how how did that could that have
happened to me could I have been in a
place like that and that's the thing
that sort of launched names
some of the video I know a lot of people
have family members for instance who who
you know might be in their 30s or 40s
with autism who in the past even 20 I'm
sorry 10 15 years ago may have been
institutionalized today right there are
regular track education entirely
different landscape today and yet the
same human impulses I mean it was in
some ways it was a real distant thing
that created a place like fertile but in
some ways it's really alive today I mean
to a certain extent just categorizing
people creating differences is there's
some enlightenment to that some notion
of can we provide better services for
people I mean these days we don't
provide services by large congregate
care institutions for the most part but
really those services are delivered in
communities and yet at the time it was
in a going back to 1848 when the
institution was formed it was an
improvement because there was people
were locked in cellars peoples were
Sicilian in terms particularly the
severely disabled people were horrendous
conditions this video that we're looking
at now is these are photos from a long
time ago and as you say the conditions
then were in many cases horrendous some
of the patients at frontal actually
worked in the lab as assistants which
sounds good
but then they were also experimented on
as we see in this question number of
this class have not been real Joe was
also along with 16 others a member of
the furnald science club in which they
were the experiment researchers used
radiation on them to test digestion they
it was a crazy it was a crazy it was a
crazy move well things changed a lot by
the 1970s the economy was going downhill
public attitudes were changing there was
a real move towards
deinstitutionalization your Uncle Joe
was put outside of Ferno for the first
time in nearly 30 years how did he
adjust yeah when he moved outside of her
a lot of questions how would he be able
to thrive would he be able to survive
and he did remarkably well he was
towards the end of his life where he
died today's the his birthday by the way
he died yeah we will have to send to Joe
spirit his happy birthday wishes because
he did wonderfully well towards the end
of his life he performed and blues clubs
he had his own apartment he was a valued
member of his community and that from
somebody who really was thought that he
wouldn't survive that he couldn't make
it he did now unlike Pineland which many
of us are familiar with fern old is
still in operation
mm-hmm what's the future and is it still
considered to be a mental institution it
is you know yeah it is still part of the
department of mental retardation system
and the debate today is is it
appropriate to have people there and the
families of those a hundred and eighty
to two hundred people who remain at Fern
'old feel very strongly that it's one of
many options that's available to them on
the other side they're those people no
you have to provide all those services
in community-based settings I found that
it there's no easy answers to what is
the best setting for providing the
service torii that does not yet have a
finish in terms of what is the proper
way to treat for people who what is the
proper way to take care of people who
need this care anyway it's another whole
film Will Rogers the name of the film
yeah this one is called frontwards
backwards and it's going to be showing
at the Maine International Film Festival
in Waterville it's going to be shown on
Tuesday July 17th at 5:30 p.m. at the
railroad square cinema additional
screenings coming up at the Camden
International Film Festival in September
we've got information on our website
just go to the 207 section when we come
back his talent